.. _v0.6:

Qrisp 0.6
=========

The latest 0.6 Qrisp update is centered around Jasp submodule, which significantly enhances scalability by enabling faster compilation for large quantum circuits and seamless integration of real-time classical computations. Additionally, we've incorporated Quantum Monte Carlo techniques with Iterative Quantum Amplitude Estimation for efficient numerical integration. UI improvements, including in-place bit-shift operators for QuantumFloats, round out this release.

Jasp
----

Jasp allows you to scale up your Qrisp code to previously unseen problem scales with the folowing features: 

* :ref:`Jaspr`: enables an efficient representation of a wide variety of (hybrid algorithms)
* :ref:`quantum_kernel`: allows to annotate a subroutine as a quantum kernel resulting in parallelization of quantum routines hosted on several QPUs.
* :ref:`qache <qache>` decorator : allows to mark a function as "reusable". Using the ``qache`` decorator not only improves the compilation speed, but also enables the compiler to speed up transformation processes.
* :ref:`jrange`: performs a loop with a dynamic bound.
* :ref:`Repeat Until Success decorator <RUS>`: repeats a given subroutine followed by a qubit measurement until the measurement returns the value 1. 
* :ref:`sample`: allows to take samples from a state that is specified by a preparation procedure.
* :ref:`jaspify decorator <jaspify>`: a fast general pupose simulator that can use state sparsity. 
* :ref:`qjit <qjit>` decorator: calls the Catalyst pipeline to compile and run the program via the Lightning simulator.
* :ref:`boolean_simulation <boolean_simulation>` decorator: Leverages the Jax pipeline to compile the program into a series of boolean operations. Restricted to programs that require only X, CX, CCX, etc. gates. This simulator can be extremely powerful for verifying the correctness of large classical subroutines, that are called by another quantum function.
* :ref:`terminal_sampling <terminal_sampling>` decorator: performs a hybrid simulation and afterwards samples from the resulting quantum state. Used to perform accelerated quantum sampling.

All of the above allows for the following:

Improvement in compilation performance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fundamental problem that many Python based quantum frameworks face is that the Python interpreter is slow compared to what is possible with compiled languages. As an example, a 35 bit modular in-place multiplication takes already ~20 seconds to compile in Qrisp. Considering typical RSA key sizes contain up to 2000 bits, compiling a circuit addressing practically relevant problem scales therefore seems unlikely. 

Note that this issue is not restricted to Qrisp but similar numbers can be observed for Qiskit or any other Python based quantum circuit SDK. 

Jasp addresses this problem by capturing the computation using `Jax <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_ infrastructure and subsequently compiling it to QIR using `Catalyst <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/index.html>`_ and established `LLVM infrastructure <https://mlir.llvm.org/>`_. Using this pipeline, Jasp achieves industrial grade compilation performance.

Performing classical real-time computations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Apart from the compilation scaling issues, many frameworks (Qrisp included) suffer from the inability to integrate classical real-time computations. 

What is a real-time computation? A classical computation that happens during the quantum computation, while the quantum computer stays in superposition. This computation has to happen much faster than the coherence time, so performing that computation by waiting for the Python interpreter to generate a new circuit is impossible. 

Real-time computations are essential for many techniques in error correction, such as syndrom decoding or magic state distillation. On the algorithmic level, real-time computations also become more popular since they are so much cheaper than the quantum equivalent. Examples are Gidney’s adder or repeat until success protocols like HHL. 

Real-time computations are deeply ingrained into the Jasp archictecture - anything that can be done with Jax can also be a real-time computation.

Static Analysis of quantum programs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jasp also allows for static analysis of quantum programs. This field encompasses important techniques like quantum resource estimation or formal verification. 

Jasp computations are stored within `Jaxpr <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jaxpr.html>`_ objects, a fully functional, SSA intermediate representation. This enables a variety of analysis and evaluation techniques, such as :ref:`boolean simulation <boolean_simulation>`, which transforms Jasp programs that contain only boolean logic into executable binaries and thus facilitates highly scalable simulations. 

This is particularly important for testing and verifying classical code running in superposition on the quantum device.

Jasp tutorial
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

More details and an user friendly walkthrough through the added functionalities of the Jasp module are provided in :ref:`documentation <jasp>` or in the :ref:`tutorial`.

Double-Bracket Quantum Imaginary Time Evolution (DB-QITE)
---------------------------------------------------------

* :ref:`Implementation of the DB-QITE algorithm <QITE>`, which allows you to prepare ground states of arbitrary Hamiltonians, and provides means to systematically improve the approximation of a ground state using shalow circuits, as described in the `DB-QITE paper by Marek Gluza et.al. <https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04554>`_
* Example on how to solve :ref:`MaxCut using DB-QITE <MaxCutQITE>`

Integration of Quantum Monte Carlo with Iterative QAE
-----------------------------------------------------

* Numerical integration is now available within Qrisp, which allows for approximating integrals not solvable analytically. Such integrals appear in many different places, from chemistry, through many-body physics, to mathematical finance.
* This is done by combining :ref:`Quantum Monte Carlo <QMCI>` techniques with a :ref:`resource efficient amplitude estimation algorithm <IQAE>`, which iteratively applies quantum amplitude amplification to find an estimation for the probability of measuring a good state (more info in :ref:`IQAE <IQAE>`)
* More details and example of using this approach for integrating the function $f(x)=x^2$ w.r.t. the uniform distribution over the interval $[0,1]$ can be found in the :ref:`tutorial`.

UI Changes
----------

* :ref:`QuantumFloats <QuantumFloat>` are now bitshifted by the **in-place** bitshift operators ``<<=`` and ``>>=``, which describes the behavior better than the previous out-of-place operators ``<<`` and ``>>``.
* The in-place bit-shift Operator is now called :ref:`Injection operator <injection>` and facilitates in-place application of out-of-place functions.
* The :ref:`mcx <mcx>` function no longer accepts lists and arbitrary :ref:`QuantumVariables <QuantumVariable>` as target. Target values have to be either :ref:`Qubit` or :ref:`QuantumBool`.

