.. _v0.8:

Qrisp 0.8
=========

Qrisp 0.8 is a landmark release bringing **Quantum Linear Algebra** to the forefront. At its core is the new :ref:`BlockEncoding <BlockEncoding>` class, which provides a NumPy-like interface for performing non-unitary matrix operations on a quantum computer. Combined with a comprehensive **Generalized Quantum Signal Processing** module, a native **MLIR dialect**, **Stim extraction** for error correction workflows, and a **scalable Shor implementation** capable of resource estimation at 2048-bit key sizes, this release positions Qrisp as a full-stack framework for utility-scale quantum algorithm development.

BlockEncoding Class
-------------------

The BlockEncoding class is the central abstraction for Quantum Linear Algebra in Qrisp. By establishing block encodings as a programming abstraction, it allows users to program complex quantum linear algebra as easily as handling arrays in NumPy. It embeds a non-unitary operator into the upper-left block of a larger unitary system. With this intuitive interface, users can write matrix expressions like addition, multiplication, inversion, polynomial transformations, and Qrisp's compiler automatically handles the heavy lifting of underlying circuit construction and ancilla management.
Block encodings can be constructed from a variety of sources:

Construction methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* :func:`BlockEncoding.from_array <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_array>` constructs a BlockEncoding from a NumPy array or sparse matrix, ideal for quick prototyping.
* :func:`BlockEncoding.from_operator <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_operator>` encodes a Hamiltonian (e.g. :ref:`QubitOperator <QubitOperator>` or :ref:`FermionicOperator <FermionicOperator>`), which is particularly useful for physics and chemistry simulations.
* :func:`BlockEncoding.from_lcu <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_lcu>` uses the Linear Combination of Unitaries (LCU) approach to construct custom weighted sums of unitaries.
* Direct constructor: For advanced users, the :func:`BlockEncoding <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding>` class constructor allows manual definition of an encoding by specifying the normalization factor (``alpha``), ancilla variables (``ancillas``), and a custom unitary function.

Supported operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
* **Matrix arithmetic**: Standard algebraic operations including addition (``+``), subtraction (``-``), scalar multiplication (``*``), matrix product (``@``), and Kronecker product (``.kron()``).
* **Spectral transformations**: :func:`inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.inv>` (matrix inversion), :func:`poly <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.poly>` (arbitrary polynomial via GQET), :func:`sim <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.sim>` (Hamiltonian simulation $e^{-iHt}$), :func:`chebyshev <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.chebyshev>` ($T_k(A)$), and :func:`qubitization <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.qubitization>`.
* **Application**: :func:`apply <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.apply>` for direct application, :func:`apply_rus <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.apply_rus>` with automatic post-selection via Repeat-Until-Success, and :func:`expectation_value <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.expectation_value>` via the Hadamard test.
* **Resource estimation**: :func:`resources <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.resources>` for gate count, depth, and qubit amount analysis.

For a hands-on introduction, check out the two part :ref:`tutorial series <BE101>` about the BlockEncoding class its features.

Scalable Shor's Algorithm
-------------------------

Building on the modular arithmetic introduced in Qrisp 0.4, this release extends the :ref:`Shor` implementation to **utility-scale** by leveraging Jasp for compilation and resource estimation. Key ingredients include:

* :class:`BigInteger <qrisp.BigInteger>` **type**: A fixed-width, little-endian base-$2^{32}$ integer type that overcomes Jax's 64-bit limitation and enables manipulation of arbitrarily large integers during tracing.
* **Jasp-compatible Montgomery arithmetic**: The full Montgomery multiplication pipeline - reduction, constant-quantum multiplication, quantum-quantum multiplication - has been reimplemented for Jasp tracing using ``jrange``, ``BigInteger``, and the Gidney adder.
* **Parallelized resource estimation**: The QPE loop is decomposed into independent windows that are traced in parallel across threads, achieving gate counting rates on the order of $10^9$ gates/s.

Using the :ref:`count_ops <count_ops>` decorator, the same algorithm that can be simulated at small scale via :ref:`jaspify` can be profiled at **128, 256, 512, 1024, and 2048-bit** key sizes - providing concrete T-gate counts and qubit budgets for future quantum hardware. An accompanying :doc:`tutorial </general/tutorial/BigInteger>` elaborates the class and walks through the full workflow.

Generalized Quantum Signal Processing
--------------------------------------

Qrisp 0.8 introduces a comprehensive :ref:`GQSP <GQSP>` module implementing the full hierarchy of Quantum Signal Processing techniques:

* :func:`GQSP <qrisp.gqsp.GQSP>`: Applies an arbitrary complex polynomial $p(z)$ to a unitary $U$ using SU(2) signal-processing rotations (`Motlagh & Wiebe, 2024 <https://journals.aps.org/prxquantum/pdf/10.1103/PRXQuantum.5.020368>`_).
* :func:`GQET <qrisp.gqsp.GQET>`: Generalized Quantum Eigenvalue Transform - applies a complex, indefinite-parity polynomial $p(H)$ to the eigenvalues of a Hermitian block-encoded operator.
* :func:`QET <qrisp.gqsp.QET>`: Quantum Eigenvalue Transform - optimized variant for real, fixed-parity polynomials requiring fewer resources.
* :func:`Hamiltonian simulation <qrisp.gqsp.hamiltonian_simulation>`: Approximates $e^{-iHt}$ via Jacobi-Anger expansion into Bessel functions.
* :func:`Matrix inversion <qrisp.gqsp.inversion>`: Quantum linear system solver with complexity $\mathcal{O}(\kappa \log(\kappa/\epsilon))$ via Chebyshev approximation of $1/x$. 
* :func:`Fourier series loader <qrisp.gqsp.fourier_series_loader>`: State preparation by loading Fourier modes into qubit amplitudes.
* :func:`Convolution <qrisp.gqsp.convolve>`: Cyclic convolution of a quantum state with a classical filter.

The :func:`GQSP angle computation <qrisp.gqsp.gqsp_angles>` runs in efficiently and numerically stable using the inverse non-linear Fourier transform and spectral factorization. All of these integrate tightly with the :ref:`BlockEncoding <BlockEncoding>` class via its ``.poly``, ``.inv``, and ``.sim`` methods.

A :doc:`detailed tutorial </general/tutorial/GQSP_filtering>` on filtered state preparation with GQSP is available.

MLIR Integration
----------------

Qrisp 0.8 introduces a **native MLIR dialect** for quantum programs. The new ``jasp`` dialect defines custom types (``!jasp.QuantumState``, ``!jasp.Qubit``, ``!jasp.QubitArray``) and operations (``CreateQubitsOp``, ``QuantumGateOp``, ``MeasureOp``, ``ResetOp``, etc.) that lower Jaspr programs into a standards-compliant MLIR module via the `xDSL <https://xdsl.dev/>`_ framework.

The :meth:`Jaspr.to_mlir <qrisp.jasp.Jaspr.to_mlir>` method converts any Jaspr into an xDSL ``ModuleOp``, where classical computation is represented in the `StableHLO <https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo>`_ dialect and quantum operations use the Jasp dialect. This opens the door to custom compiler passes, cross-dialect optimizations, and integration with the broader `MLIR/LLVM ecosystem <https://mlir.llvm.org/>`_.

For details see the :ref:`MLIR Interface <mlir_interface>` documentation.

The Qrisp is still compatible with compiling to MLIR via `Catalyst <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/index.html>`_ in will remain so.

Stim Extraction
---------------

Qrisp now provides first-class support for extracting `Stim <https://github.com/quantumlib/Stim>`_ circuits from Jasp programs, bridging the gap between high-level quantum programming and error correction simulation.

* The :func:`extract_stim <qrisp.jasp.extract_stim>` decorator traces a Qrisp function, converts it to a Stim circuit, and returns typed handles for measurements, detectors, and observables.
* The :func:`parity <qrisp.parity>` function computes XOR parity of measurement results, with support for creating Stim ``DETECTOR`` and ``OBSERVABLE_INCLUDE`` annotations.
* The :func:`find_detectors <qrisp.misc.stim_tools.find_detectors>` decorator automatically identifies detector instructions using `tqecd <https://github.com/tqec/tqecd>`_.
* The :ref:`StimBackend <StimBackend>` provides a ``BatchedBackend`` built on Stim for fast Clifford simulation.
* :func:`stim_noise <qrisp.misc.stim_tools.stim_noise>` functions allow applying Stim error models (``X_ERROR``, ``DEPOLARIZE1``, etc.) directly to qubits.

LCD / COLD
----------

Qrisp 0.8 adds digitized counterdiabatic quantum optimization via the :ref:`DCQOProblem <DCQO>` class:

* **LCD** (Local Counterdiabatic Driving): Uses an analytically computed adiabatic gauge potential to accelerate quantum annealing for QUBO problems.
* **COLD** (Counterdiabatic Optimized Local Driving): Extends LCD with a control Hamiltonian and numerical optimization of pulse parameters.

A convenience function :func:`solve_QUBO <qrisp.cold.solve_QUBO>` provides a quick-start interface for both methods.

CKS Algorithm
--------------

The `Childs-Kothari-Somma <https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.02306>`_ (CKS) algorithm for solving quantum linear systems has been implemented as a standalone :ref:`algorithm <CKS>`. It uses LCU with qubitization and a Chebyshev polynomial approximation of $1/x$.

Quantum Lanczos
---------------

The :ref:`Quantum Lanczos <lanczos_alg>` algorithm estimates ground-state energies of Hamiltonians by constructing a Krylov subspace from Chebyshev polynomial expectation values $\langle T_k(H) \rangle$. Rather than relying on real or imaginary time evolution, it uses block-encoded Chebyshev polynomials, measures expectation values via ``lanczos_even``/``lanczos_odd`` subroutines, and solves a regularized generalized eigenvalue problem. The implementation works in both Jasp and standard Qrisp modes.

QDrift
------

:meth:`QubitOperator.qdrift <qrisp.operators.qubit.QubitOperator.qdrift>` implements the `Quantum Stochastic Drift Protocol <https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.08017>`_, which approximates Hamiltonian time-evolution $e^{-iHt}$ by randomly sampling individual Pauli-term exponentials with probabilities proportional to their coefficients. It provides a channel-based approach to Hamiltonian simulation requiring $N = \mathcal{O}(\lambda^2 t^2 / \epsilon)$ samples, complementing the existing :meth:`trotterization <qrisp.operators.qubit.QubitOperator.trotterization>` method.

BatchedBackend
--------------

The new :ref:`BatchedBackend <BatchedBackend>` solves the high-overhead problem of individual circuit executions on physical backends. Instead of dispatching each circuit independently (incurring network latency, authentication, and compilation overhead per call), the ``BatchedBackend`` collects circuit queries from multiple threads and dispatches them in a single batch via the ``.dispatch()`` method.

Other New Features
------------------

* **Reflection primitive**: The :ref:`reflection <reflection>` function applies a reflection operator $R = (1 - e^{i\phi})|\psi\rangle\langle\psi| - I$ around a quantum state specified by a preparation function. Supports arbitrary phase shifts and ``reflection_indices`` for oblivious amplitude amplification.
* **Depth metric**: The :meth:`Jaspr.depth <qrisp.jasp.Jaspr.depth>` method computes the critical-path circuit depth of a Jaspr program via JIT-compiled qubit-level scheduling, complementing the existing :ref:`count_ops <count_ops>` resource estimator.
* **Qubits metric**: The :meth:`Jaspr.num_qubits <qrisp.jasp.Jaspr.num_qubits>` tracks qubit allocation and deallocation events during a quantum computation.
* **QuantumArray element-wise arithmetic**: :ref:`QuantumArray <QuantumArray>` now supports element-wise ``+``, ``-``, ``*``, ``==``, and ``!=`` between arrays, scalars, and NumPy/Jax arrays.
* **Arithmetic tools**: New out-of-place quantum arithmetic functions: ``q_max``, ``q_min``, ``q_floor``, ``q_ceil``, ``q_round``, ``q_fractional``, and ``q_modf`` for :ref:`QuantumFloat <QuantumFloat>` values.
* **Jasp MCZ**: Multi-controlled Z gate now available as a Jasp primitive.
* ``prepare`` can now receive dynamic statevector arrays in Jasp mode.


Compatibility
-------------

* **Cirq Conversion**: Qrisp circuits can now be converter to Cirq using :meth:`QuantumCircuit.to_cirq`.
* Jax 0.7.1 compatibility.
* Catalyst 0.14 compatibility, including the option to pass a PennyLane device (e.g. NVIDIA/AMD-GPU) to :meth:`Jaspr.qjit <qrisp.jasp.Jaspr.qjit>`.

New Tutorials
-------------

* :ref:`Block Encoding tutorial (Vol. 1 & Vol. 2) <BE101>` - A two-part introduction to the BlockEncoding class and its applications.
* :doc:`GQSP filtering tutorial </general/tutorial/GQSP_filtering>` - Filtered state preparation using Generalized Quantum Signal Processing.
* :doc:`Shor's algorithm at scale </general/tutorial/BigInteger>` - Resource estimation for Shor's algorithm at 128–2048 bit key sizes.
* :doc:`Counterdiabatic Driving </general/tutorial/CD>` - LCD and COLD protocols for QUBO optimization.
