.. _v0.9:

Qrisp 0.9
=========

A redesigned **backend interface** anchors Qrisp 0.9, alongside the **Quantum
Singular Value Transform (QSVT)** at the heart of a new suite of
BlockEncoding transformations, including the new **FOQCS-LCU (Fast
One-Qubit-Controlled Select Linear Combination of Unitaries)** block encoding method,
a full **circuit optimization pass manager**, and new state preparation primitives.
Richer **QuantumArray** arithmetic and meaningful upgrades to arithmetic subroutines,
including a new **Gidney adder** based on venting carries via mid-circuit measurements,
round things out.

QSVT and Singular Value Transformations
---------------------------------------
 
With Qrisp 0.9, the Quantum Singular Value Transform (QSVT) framework is now available
as the primary tool for matrix inversion and singular value processing to operators that
aren't necessarily Hermitian. The :ref:`BlockEncoding <BlockEncoding>` class gains the
following new methods:
 
* :func:`svt <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.svt>`: Applies a polynomial to the
  singular values of a block-encoded operator, supporting both even and odd parity
  polynomials in either the Chebyshev or Polynomial basis.
* :func:`pseudo_inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.pseudo_inv>`: Using Quantum
  Singular Value Transform, this function returns a block encoding that approximates
  the threshold pseudoinverse by ignoring singular values below a specific limit to
  regularize ill-conditioned linear systems. 
* :func:`inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.inv>` now uses QSVT by default,
  succeeding the previous Hermitianization-based GQSVT approach. A ``method`` keyword
  lets you switch between QSVT, GQSVT (Generalized QSVT via Hermitianization), or
  QET (Quantum Eigenvalue Transform) as needed.
* :func:`dagger <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.dagger>`: Returns the adjoint of a
  block-encoded operator.
 
GQSVT, introduced in PR #479, is available as one of the three methods on
:func:`inv <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.inv>` (``method="GQSVT"``), giving you
a Hermitianization-based fallback for cases where QET's Hermitian-only restriction
doesn't apply. Two further standalone functions round out the ``qrisp.gqsp`` module:
:func:`dalzell_inversion <qrisp.gqsp.dalzell_inversion>`, Qrisp's implementation of
the Dalzell Quantum Linear System Solver via QSVT-based kernel reflection, and
:func:`pseudo_inversion <qrisp.gqsp.pseudo_inversion>` for QSVT-based threshold
pseudoinversion (also reachable as :func:`BlockEncoding.pseudo_inv
<qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.pseudo_inv>`).

BlockEncoding Refactoring
-------------------------
 
BlockEncoding has been rebuilt around a cleaner **Base Class + Facade pattern** (PR
#628), making the codebase easier to extend going forward:
 
* **Modular architecture**: The old monolith is now split across
  ``block_encoding_base.py`` (the abstract base), ``block_encoding.py`` (the facade),
  ``constructors/`` (from_array, from_lcu, from_eye, from_projector), and
  ``transformations/`` (inv, poly, pseudo_inv, sim, svt).
* **Clear separation of concerns**: The base class defines the core interface and
  shared utilities, while the facade provides a user-friendly API that delegates to
  the appropriate implementation based on the chosen method.
* **Easier extensibility**: Adding new block encoding methods or transformations now
  involves implementing a new class that inherits from the base and updating the facade
  to recognize it, without needing to modify existing code.


FOQCS-LCU Block Encoding
------------------------
 
Qrisp 0.9 adds the **FOQCS-LCU** block encoding method to the :ref:`BlockEncoding
<BlockEncoding>` class (PR #597), opening up a more direct path to block encoding
Heisenberg and spin-glass type operators:
 
* :func:`from_foqcs_lcu_prep
  <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_foqcs_lcu_prep>`: Builds a FOQCS-LCU block
  encoding from a custom PREP function, giving you full control over the underlying
  state preparation.
* :func:`from_foqcs_lcu_operator
  <qrisp.block_encodings.BlockEncoding.from_foqcs_lcu_operator>`: Builds a FOQCS-LCU
  block encoding straight from a :class:`QubitOperator <qrisp.operators.QubitOperator>`,
  automatically detecting whether the operator fits a Heisenberg or spin-glass model and
  preparing it accordingly via the new operator analysis utilities.

Circuit Optimization Pass Manager
---------------------------------
 
Qrisp 0.9 ships a complete **circuit optimization pass management system** (PR #564),
giving you a modular, composable framework in place of the previous ad-hoc compilation
routines. Key features include:
 
* :class:`PassManager <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.PassManager>`: Keeps an ordered
  list of :class:`CircuitPass <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.CircuitPass>` instances,
  runs them in sequence via ``.run(qc)``, and can verify the outcome with
  ``.verify(qc)`` (checking unitarity or that measurement statistics are preserved).
  Add new passes with a simple ``+=``.
* Passes available out of the box:
   * :func:`cancel_inverses <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.cancel_inverses>`:
     Cancels adjacent gate-inverse pairs via DAG analysis, also fusing compatible
     neighbors along the way (SWAP with CX/CP/RZZ, same-site rotation gates, Gidney
     AND compute/uncompute, and controlled operations whose base gates cancel).
  * :func:`combine_single_qubit_gates <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.combine_single_qubit_gates>`:
    Merges consecutive single-qubit gates for tighter circuits.
  * :func:`commute_swaps <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.commute_swaps>`: Moves
    SWAP gates around using commutation rules.
  * :func:`resolve_swaps <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.resolve_swaps>`: Resolves
    SWAP networks cleanly.
  * :func:`remove_barriers <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.remove_barriers>`:
    Clears out all barrier instructions.
  * :func:`reverse_parallelize <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.reverse_parallelize>`:
    Restructures circuits to unlock more parallelism.
  * :func:`manual_layout <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.manual_layout>`: Gives
    you direct control over qubit placement.
  * :func:`convert_to_cx <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.convert_to_cx>`,
    :func:`convert_to_cz <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.convert_to_cz>`,
    :func:`convert_to_pry <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.convert_to_pry>`: Handle
    gate basis conversion (the last of which introduces the new ``PRYGate``).
  * :func:`decompose <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.decompose>`: Breaks
    composite or parametrized gates down further.
  * :func:`gray_synth_toffoli <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.gray_synth_toffoli>`: Applies
    Gray-code synthesis to Toffoli gates.
  * :func:`cancel_zero_controls <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.cancel_zero_controls>`: Removes
    gates that carry zero controls.
  * :func:`arrange_swaps <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.arrange_swaps>`: Lines
    up SWAP gates for smarter routing.
  * :func:`visualize <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.passes.visualize>`: Makes
    optimization culprits easy to spot visually.
 
:class:`CircuitPass <qrisp.circuit.pass_management.CircuitPass>` also ships two
correctness-checking methods, ``compare_unitary`` and ``compare_measurement``, used
internally by ``PassManager.verify()`` to confirm that a pass leaves a circuit's
unitary or measurement statistics unchanged.
 
The standalone ``cancel_inverses`` utility is still around, but running it as part of
the `PassManager` chain is now the recommended path.

Backend Interface Redesign
--------------------------
 
The backend interface has been redesigned from the ground up for a cleaner, more
modular abstraction (PR #331 and its follow-ups). The new `Backend` class provides a consistent
interface for both simulators and hardware backends, abstracting away the differences and allowing users
to switch between them seamlessly.

* **Improved error handling**: The backend interface now includes more robust error handling and
  clearer error messages, making it easier to diagnose and fix issues when running circuits.
* **New abstract :class:`Backend <qrisp.interface.Backend>` class**: The new base
  abstraction for all backends, offering ``run_async(circuits, shots)`` for an
  immediate ``Job`` (Future-style) alongside a synchronous ``run(circuits, shots)``
  wrapper for convenience, plus ``batched()`` to obtain a ``BatchedBackend`` and
  ``retrieve_job(job_id)`` to look up a previously submitted job. Runtime options
  flow through ``_default_options()`` / ``update_options()``. Hardware metadata
  properties (``health``, ``info``, ``queue``, ``num_qubits``, ``max_circuits``,
  ``connectivity``, ``gate_set``, ``error_rates``) return ``None`` by default, ready
  to be filled in by a given backend.
* **:class:`BackendLike <qrisp.interface.BackendLike>` protocol**: A structural typing
  protocol that both ``Backend`` and ``BatchedBackend`` satisfy, so type hints stay
  flexible.
* **:class:`Job <qrisp.interface.Job>` class**: Tracks the lifecycle of a single
  execution with its own status handling (``last_known_status``) and result
  retrieval. ``submit()``, ``result()``, ``cancel()``, and ``status()`` are abstract
  methods that concrete backends implement; ``run_async()`` is expected to call
  ``job.submit()`` before handing the ``Job`` back to the caller.
* **:class:`BatchedBackend <qrisp.interface.BatchedBackend>` reworked**: Intentionally
  does not inherit from ``Backend`` (its ``run()`` returns lazy, unpopulated results,
  which would violate the Liskov substitution principle). Circuits queued via
  ``run()`` are only executed once ``dispatch()`` is called, with ``clear()`` and
  ``pending_count`` rounding out the queue management. ``batched_measurement`` is
  deprecated in favor of calling ``get_measurement()`` with a ``BatchedBackend``
  directly.
* **Backend migrations**: ``DefaultBackend`` is now :class:`QrispSimulatorBackend
  <qrisp.interface.QrispSimulatorBackend>`, living under
  ``interface/simulators/``, with the ``qrisp.default_backend`` module kept around
  as a thin compatibility shim. ``QiskitBackend``, ``QiskitRuntimeBackend``,
  ``AQTBackend``, and ``IQMBackend`` have all been brought up to the new API.
  ``VirtualBackend`` itself is kept as a deprecated drop-in subclass of the new
  ``Backend`` for backward compatibility, raising a ``QrispDeprecationWarning`` on
  use.
* **A leaner core**: The old ``BackendClient``/``BackendServer`` (qunicorn) network
  infrastructure and the Docker-based backends have been removed entirely.


COLD (Counterdiabatic Local Driving)
------------------------------------
 
The :ref:`DCQOProblem <DCQO>` class (PR #614) introduces a smoother scheduling
function, :math:`\operatorname{lam}(t) = \sin^2\!\bigl(\frac{\pi}{2}\sin^2\!\bigl(\frac{\pi
t}{2T}\bigr)\bigr)`, for better-behaved annealing. The ``g_func`` parameter has been
retired; ``g`` and ``g_deriv`` are now computed automatically from the time list. A new
``precision`` parameter (default 0.01) lets you dial in expectation-value accuracy, and
``exp_value_backend`` makes it possible to run measurement-based optimization on real
hardware, with an automatic fallback to statevector simulation when needed.


Dicke State and Unbalanced W State
----------------------------------
 
Two new deterministic state preparation routines join the library (PR #572):
 
* :func:`dicke_state <qrisp.dicke_state>`: Prepares a uniform superposition over every
  basis state with Hamming weight :math:`k`, built on the deterministic algorithm from
  `Baez et al. (2024) <https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.07358>`_, with gate depth scaling as
  :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)`.
* :func:`unbalanced_w_state <qrisp.unbalanced_w_state>`: Prepares a generalized W state
  :math:`\sum_i a_i |e_i\rangle` with arbitrary, complex amplitudes via a linear chain
  of ``XXYY`` gates, hitting :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` depth and gate count.
  Works equally well in standard and Jasp modes.
 
Both are invert-compatible and fully traceable under Jasp.
 
QuantumArray Upgrades
---------------------
 
:ref:`QuantumArray <QuantumArray>` picks up a much fuller set of element-wise
operations (PR #519):
 
* **In-place arithmetic**: ``iadd``, ``isub``, and ``imul`` for QuantumArray, with
  support for ``np.integer`` and ``np.floating`` scalar types.
* **Logical operations**: Element-wise ``and``, ``or``, and ``xor`` between arrays and
  scalars.
* **Reductions**: :meth:`all() <qrisp.QuantumArray.all>` and :meth:`any()
  <qrisp.QuantumArray.any>` reduce over axes through the new ``_reduce_over_axes``
  helper.
* **Exception safety**: Multiplying a QuantumArray by a classical value now raises a
  clear ``TypeError``, and element-wise operations check that operand moduli line up.

Other Arithmetic Enhancements
-----------------------------
 
* **Gidney adder refactored** (PR #473): Now lives in its own dedicated module,
  ``adders/gidney_adder.py``. It supports ``c_in`` / ``c_out`` carry qubits, ``BigInteger`` operands,
  and custom inversion within the Jasp pipeline. The older variants are no longer available. 
* **Cuccaro adder** (PR #615): Now accepts ``c_in`` and ``c_out`` as well, bringing it
  in line with the Gidney adder's interface.
* **Gidney venting adder** (PR #537): Adds ``gidney_cq_venting_adder``, an
  implementation of Gidney's carry-venting classical-quantum adder as described in
  `arXiv:2507.23079 <https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23079>`_. The adder automatically
  defers to the standard Gidney adder for very small registers, where venting offers
  no real advantage, and comes with a full Jasp-traceable test suite.
* **BigInteger Montgomery arithmetic** (PR #495): Fixes quantum-quantum Montgomery
  multiplication for non-standard Montgomery shifts, adds ``bi_pow2mod`` for traced
  exponentiation, and gives the Montgomery decoder a proper rebuild with correct
  BigInteger digit handling.
* **QuantumModulus**: A rebuilt constructor, fixes for uniform superposition, and new
  compatibility with traced QubitOperators.
 
Typing Module
-------------
 
A new :mod:`qrisp.typing <qrisp.typing>` module brings standardized type aliases to
the library (PR #543):
 
* :class:`QubitLike <qrisp.typing.QubitLike>`: ``Qubit | int | Sequence[Qubit | int]``
* :class:`ClbitLike <qrisp.typing.ClbitLike>`: ``Clbit | int | Sequence[Clbit | int]``
* :class:`FloatLike <qrisp.typing.FloatLike>`: Covers Python ``float``/``int``,
  ``np.floating``/``np.integer``, SymPy ``Expr``, and JAX arrays and tracers
  (replacing the previous ``Param`` alias).
* :class:`ScalarLike <qrisp.typing.ScalarLike>`, :class:`NDArrayLike
  <qrisp.typing.NDArrayLike>`, :class:`ArrayLike <qrisp.typing.ArrayLike>`: General
  scalar and array types to keep numeric code consistent.
 
Other New Features
------------------
 
* **MLIR / xDSL dialect** (PR #465): JASP now defines a native xDSL dialect with
  ``QuantumGateOp`` and ``MeasureOp`` operations and IRDL-based verification.
  ``CreateQubitsOp`` returns a quantum state operand.
* **StableHLO lowering** (PR #577): A first working version of stablehlo lowering,
  with scalar linalg folding, tensor folding, and a ``cmpi extui`` rewrite pattern,
  plus lowering of ``stablehlo.case`` to ``scf.if`` through xDSL foreign-type
  processing.
* **Composite gate interpreter** (PR #593): A new interpreter for parametrized and
  compound gates that supports decomposition for MLIR emission and ``scan``
  operations, using ``lru_cache`` to keep the call graph compact.
* **BoundQubitOperator cleanup** (PR #559): ``BoundQubitTerm`` and
  ``BoundQubitOperator`` have been retired from the codebase, with
  ``operator_factors`` updated to match.
* **QubitOperator improvements**: A new ``_to_pauli_dict()`` helper returns the
  Pauli expansion of an operator as a dictionary; multiplying an operator by zero
  now correctly empties ``terms_dict`` (PR #612).
* **Refactored MaxCut module** (PR #542): Cleaner structure and documentation
  throughout.
* **Benchmarking improvements** (PR #505): Metric interpreters now support a callback
  threshold, giving you finer control over profiling granularity.
* **Catalyst 0.15 compatibility** (PR #568).
* **Gast dependency** added to the ``pip install`` requirements (PR #474).
* **Pass documentation**: Every circuit pass now comes with a full docstring and
  examples (PR #564).
* **Depth metric** improvements (PR #451): Support for negative slicing values, plus a
  helpful warning when computing depth on already-profiled circuits.
* **IQM backend** domain update (PR #561) and migration of the IQM package.
* **Controlled-U3 compilation** fixes (PR #551): Correct handling of non-trivial
  control states, global phase, and the ``U3Gate`` class.
 
Compatibility
-------------
 
* **Backend API breaking change**: ``Backend`` is now the base abstraction for all
  backends. ``VirtualBackend`` still works, but only as a deprecated drop-in
  subclass. ``DefaultBackend`` is now ``QrispSimulatorBackend``. ``batched_measurement``
  is deprecated in favor of ``BatchedBackend.dispatch()``.
* **``cancel_inverses`` now runs as part of the PassManager chain** alongside the
  other built-in passes; the standalone function still works as before.
* **``Param`` type alias renamed to ``FloatLike``** and moved into the new
  ``qrisp.typing`` module.
* **``BoundQubitTerm`` and ``BoundQubitOperator`` removed**; use ``QubitTerm`` /
  ``QubitOperator`` directly instead.
* **``unbalanced_W_state`` renamed to ``unbalanced_w_state``** (lowercase ``w``).
* **Cuccaro adder's ``c_in`` parameter** is supported but kept simple, with
  independent ancilla management.
* **``quake_lowering`` directory removed** (it had been added to main by mistake).
* The old ``qunicorn``-based ``BackendClient``/``BackendServer`` network
  infrastructure and the Docker-based backends have been removed.
* New :func:`convert_to_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_to_cirq>` and
  :func:`convert_from_cirq <qrisp.interface.convert_from_cirq>` functions give you
  bidirectional conversion between Qrisp and `Cirq
  <https://quantumai.google/cirq>`_ circuits (PR #610).
* **``jrange`` ``step`` argument removed** (PR #652): Passing three arguments to
  :func:`jrange <qrisp.jasp.jrange>` now emits a ``QrispDeprecationWarning`` and raises
  a ``TypeError``. Use a step-1 loop and multiply the loop variable by the desired step.
* Jax 0.5.x compatibility (matching current Jasp tracing requirements).
* Catalyst 0.15 compatibility.
 
Updated Tutorial
----------------
 
* :doc:`Counterdiabatic Driving Protocols </general/tutorial/CD>` - Updated for the
  COLD module's smoother scheduling function and the new ``precision`` /
  ``exp_value_backend`` parameters (updated).